- Here in the Forge,
the best bladesmiths
in the world
have gone head-to-head,
creating some of
history's deadliest weapons.
A select few have
earned the title Champion.
- Yes!
- But tonight
in a "Forged in Fire" first,
five of these iron warriors
return for the
ultimate competition.
You will have to earn
your spot at the anvil,
and one of you
will be sent home
before we ever light
the first forge.
- I don't want to go home
without having the chance
to swing a hammer.
- Only one will emerge
as the best of the best,
taking home $10,000
and leaving with the title
Champion of Champions.
*
- My name's Neil Kamimura.
I was asked to come back,
and I would never say no
to my "Forged in Fire" family.
What I feel I've come back for
is to represent
the people just starting off
and show them that
you can do this.
The judges asked me to make
a competition chopper
before I even got out here.
I have no idea what they're
gonna do with it.
- My name is Theo Nazz.
Winning "Forged in Fire"
allowed me to turn my hobby
into a full-time career
in knife making and teaching.
The judges like to break
the rules and mix things up.
So I really don't know
what I'm up against.
- My name's
Kelly Vermeer Vella.
I have no idea what they're
gonna do with my chopper.
I've tried to guess.
But I returned
to "Forged in Fire"
just to prove to myself
that I'm not a one-hit wonder.
*
- My name's Raymond Smith,
and I'm back on "Forged in Fire"
because last time I was here
the other competitor
didn't meet the requirements,
so it basically
was a default win.
But after I won,
I was on a trip to California,
and on the way back,
a gentleman
I was sitting next to
actually recognized me.
And he was like, "I need your
autograph, and I need this."
So I just give him
a business card, and here we go.
- I am Nick Marcelja.
Last time,
all three of my opponents
had catastrophic failures
on their blades.
So I'd like to prove
it wasn't really a fluke.
After watching myself on TV,
I did find it interesting
what you guys beep over
and what you don't.
"I feel like crap."
They let that go through,
while, "I feel like [bleep]"
doesn't work.
Get in there!
- Champions,
Welcome back to the Forge.
You're probably wondering
why there are five of you
and there's only room
for four in this forge
and why we asked you
to forge your best work
in the form
of a competition chopper
before you even got here.
You're all champions.
So this time,
we thought we'd do things
a little bit differently
and raise the bar even higher.
In a "Forged in Fire" first,
we're going to start
with a test on these blades
you forged at home.
You will have to earn
your spot at the anvil,
and one of you
will be sent home
before we ever light
the first forge.
All right, let's meet the men
judging your work.
Up first, two-time winner
and our very first
Champion of Champions,
Ben Abbott.
- Holy crap.
He's the Champion of Champions,
so how fitting
for him to be our judge.
- Edged-weapons specialist
Doug Marcaida.
Historic weapons re-creations
specialist David Baker.
Since we like to throw people
right into the fire here,
Ben, you're up.
*
- Hello, Champions.
In this qualifying round,
in order to test
the edge geometry
and the overall construction
of your blade,
I'm gonna chop into this log
ten times each.
I'm glad it's you in there,
not me this time.
Nick, you're up first.
Are you ready?
- Oh, sure.
Let's do it.
My blade is 80 layers of
ladder pattern Damascus
with G10 handles.
I tested my blade on 2x4s,
and it worked fine.
But we'll see what happens.
*
- Well, Nick,
your edge held up very well.
I don't see any wiggles
in the blade.
The handle has got
a nice feel to it.
It didn't come out
of my hands.
Good job.
- Thank you much.
- Ray, you're next.
Are you ready?
- I'm ready.
I built my chopper
out of 5160 steel.
I put an Osage handle
on it.
I think it'll chop.
*
- Well, Ray, your edge held up
very, very well,
but didn't quite bite
into the wood
as much as I would have liked
to have seen it do.
I'm having a rough time
indexing this handle
into my hand.
It's kind of blocky.
I did feel the knife
take a roll at one point
because I just couldn't get
enough grip on the handle.
- Kelly, you're up next.
Are you ready?
- You bet.
- All right.
- The competition chopper
is 900-layer
laddered Damascus
with a patriotic handle.
It's freaking beautiful,
and I don't want it to die.
*
- Kelly,
this is a beautiful knife.
It chopped the wood very well.
It's a purpose-built machine.
I love the flag.
It's a nice touch...
even though I'm English.
[both chuckle]
Theo, you're up next.
Are you ready?
- Let's do it.
- All right.
- A forged 80CRV2
with some 3D-printed
cast bronze medallions
for a little extra grip
on the handle.
I think I feel nervous.
But I'm pretty sure
it's actually just eagerness
and anticipation.
I just want to see
how the chopper does.
*
- Well, Theo, I was a little
nervous going into this
at how thin of a blade this was,
but it held up perfectly.
The handnd
is a little bit small,
a little bit square.
But it's a nice little chopper.
- Thank you.
- Okay, Neil.
You're up next.
Are you ready?
- Ready.
I made mine
with 5160 spring, G10,
and some locally grown
cocobolo.
I think my competitors
are amazing,
so I'm a little nervous...
you know.
*
- Well, Neil,
your edge held up beautifully.
It's still as sharp as
when it was made.
Did quite a number
on the oak as well.
Very comfortable handle.
Did very well.
- Thank you.
*
- Being eliminated right away
would really be
quite unfortunate.
I don't want to go home
without even having the chance
to swing a hammer.
- Champions, first of all,
thank you all
for bringing in blades
that were so well-made.
It makes our decision
that much tougher.
But unfortunately,
there's only room in this Forge
for four of you.
The decision has been made.
It's time for one of you
to leave the Forge.
*
- Ray...
unfortunately, your blade
did not make the cut.
- Ray, I love the file work
on the back.
It's a really handsome shape.
But unfortunately, things have
to come down to small details.
It just came down
to the fact
that I had a really tough time
holding on to your handle,
and I really couldn't transfer
as much force to the wood
as I would have liked.
- Ray, at this time,
I have to ask you
to please leave the Forge.
- One thing with making
something like this
is it doesn't fit everybody.
Sometimes that can
be the difference.
But even though
I'm being sent home,
I'm still a
"Forged in Fire" champion.
Can't take that away.
*
- Good job, bladesmiths.
You've earned a spot
at your anvils
in the qualifying round.
Now it's time to
get into the main event.
Now, I'm sure you're all
looking at this drape
with a little bit of anxiety.
- This is Champion of Champions.
You can't count anything out.
- Today we're not gonna be
providing you
with just one steel or
two steels to work with.
Instead, we're providing
you with this.
*
All of them.
This is every type of steel
that we have in the Forge.
Your first round challenge
is to use two or more
of these materials
combined with powdered steel
in a canister Damascus.
The blade parameters
are as follows--
The length of the blade,
not including the tang,
must fall between
10 and 14 inches.
The overall length
of your weapon
must not exceed 22 inches.
Now, one more thing--
today we will not be
giving you any canisters
that are of substantial size.
Instead, you'll be
using these.
*
- Yay.
Baby cans.
- This is
a 2-inch-by-2-inch can,
and I imagine if you're
gonna make a blade
that is between
10 and 14 inches,
you're gonna need
more than one of these.
- I've never done
a normal canister Damascus,
let alone a teeny-tiny one.
Great.
[laughs]
- Bear in mind that
in the second round,
you'll be attaching
handles to those blades
to turn them into
fully functional weapons
that will then be tested
for strength and durability
in an ice chop,
and for sharpness
in a water bottle slice.
You will have three hours
to forge your blades
with no design period.
Good luck, bladesmiths.
Your three hours starts now.
All right, Ben, you've been
in this competition before.
You've won it twice.
Got to defer to you.
How did you do this challenge
easier and faster?
- You got to do
time management.
- Isn't the cube Damascus
just basically half
a canister Damascus?
- It is.
- How much canisters
do you need?
- Well, they can use as many
or as little cans as they like.
But for a 10- to 14-inch blade,
I'd use two.
- Well, it seems like all of our
smiths are using three cans,
and Nick actually has four.
- Three cans is quite
an aggressive number
to be dealing with.
- Ah.
[laughing]
This challenge sucks.
You want us to make
something difficult
and then make it
even more difficult
by making us use
little boxes.
Thanks a lot.
Yeah.
[groans] There we go.
There, they can bleep that out.
I have done
canister Damascus before,
so I paint it with the
Wite-Out on the inside.
- What does the Liquid Paper
do for a smith?
- The Liquid Paper keeps
the outside canister steel
from welding to
the interior steel.
- We've got a
Wite-Out explosion
over on the table
where Nick is working.
- I know it's got to be dry
before I put
the materials inside.
So I hold it in front
of the forge to dry it out.
- Look at Nick. He's got his
Wite-Out on fire over there.
- Oh, by the way,
Wite-Out burns.
It turns into little candles.
- The problem is, you can burn
off that Wite-Out
Now you've got sections
that are gonna stick to the can
and sections that aren't gonna
stick to the can.
*
- Let's talk about
this challenge.
You have to use two of those
steels that were on the table,
in addition to
the powdered steel.
Which ones would you use, Ben?
- You go with
the thing you know.
They're all hardenable steel.
The powder
is where it's most important,
'cause you really want
to have powder
as the very, very top,
because anything that isn't
is gonna leave
a lot of gaps.
- Having three hours
to do the challenge,
I don't feel like I can
do the Wite-Out
on all those canisters.
There's got to be
some sort of sneaky way
to, like, put it together
and a little bit faster.
- We know that the canister is
mild steel and not hardenable,
but Kelly's doing
something genius.
She took a piece of W2 steel,
and she welded that
to the top of her cans,
so that when she goes
to forge-weld those
billets together--
- She has a hard core.
- She has hard to hard.
- The W2 hacks will go
towards the center of my blade,
so I'll have bad stuff,
good stuff,
good stuff, bad stuff.
And I can grind the bad stuff
off of the blade edge.
- I'm using 52100 ball bearings
combined with the 1095.
With canister Damascus,
the hardest part
is getting that shell off.
So I'm simply not.
But it's important to keep
the hardenable steel centered
because that will be my edge.
Cook.
Cook, you bastard.
I have no idea what
I'm gonna forge.
It really depends on
how much steel I end up with,
'cause according to my math,
I'm only gonna end up
with about 8 cubic inches
of useable material.
If I do a third--
Oh, no. Okay, hold on.
I may only end up
with about three pieces--
Oh, the logic
on that doesn't work.
[bleep]. Now I'm not 100%
sure that's the right--
*
I'm not a mathematician.
- The other bladesmiths
are talking about math
and square footage
and cubic footage,
and I'm like...
So my plan is
to use the Wite-Out,
cut the cans off,
and use the two types
of ball bearings.
So I get my first can
in the forge,
and how long do I
actually leave it in there?
- I know these cans
are smaller,
but I'm worried that Neil
has not gone far enough
down through the process
to truly get a good weld
inside that can.
- Yeah, and as soon
as it's open,
all bets are off.
- Yeah.
- Oh, [bleep] me.
Ta-da,
it's not forged well.
[laughs]
It didn't weld.
Now I know I have to leave
the other cans in there longer.
- One hour
has already elapsed!
You have just two hours
remaining to finish your blades!
*
Ben, how much better is it to be
sitting there than out there?
- I feel like
an ex-gladiator
that's now sitting up
with all of the emperors.
- I put a big cube
in each one of the boxes,
as well as some
of the ball bearings.
The steel feels like
it's welded together
inside the canisters.
So now it's time to start
getting those canisters
off the outside.
- Since he lit all that
Wite-Out on fire,
I think he's gonna have
a lot of places in there
that stuck together.
- The one side peels off
fairly easily.
Ha!
But the other side doesn't
want to come off at all.
I smash.
Make mess.
As I expected,
getting the canisters
off of the blocks of steel
is just a total--
[groans]
Golf clubs look easy,
at this point.
Give me the golf clubs.
I'll do that again.
*
- I'm real confident
with my canister weld.
I've never really had
any trouble with it.
I've put all sorts of
stupid things in cans.
Get off my thing,
you little bastard.
I made a knife
out of my washing machine
because it made me angry.
- The masterful hammer strikes
that she's doing
to open up the canisters
is amazing.
- That doesn't surprise me.
She's a farrier.
*
- I got the steel
in the cans welded.
Now I'm trying to forge-weld
the cans together.
I'm going to try and fold
the one over the other one
and make a stack of three
and see if they'll stick
together to themselves.
*
I can see that my pieces
aren't welding together.
Oh, come on, you [bleep].
- Neil's been struggling, trying
to get three different sections
folded over
and forge-welded together.
- I feel like the judges
are here to not only break us
but prove why we can be
Champion of Champions.
I think it's a huge honor,
and I think you should be broken
to earn it.
So I can't quit.
- I would take a second
to weld excessively.
Make sure it's not
going anywhere
and just squish the
ever-living [bleep] out of it.
*
As a teacher,
it's difficult to watch
Neil struggle with his welds.
I want him to succeed
so that when I win against him,
it's even more rewarding.
[chuckles]
- Now, Theo's billet's
looking really sharp.
- Yep. And he's doing something
really smart.
He's not drawing out
right away.
He's just setting, setting,
setting those welds,
making sure that
they're flawless.
- 60 minutes remaining
to finish you blades!
- Seems to be going together
in a sort of messy,
nasty-looking pile of crap.
I have all just
gnarly bits on it,
which I hope are surface
imperfections
that I can get down to good
steel in the middle of it.
- I can actually see creases
down the edge of Nick's billet.
- You can still see those flakes
hanging off the edge.
- I need to grind that stuff off
so I can get it heat-treated.
*
- I'm feeling exhausted,
beat down,
frustrated.
Holy [bleep].
I can do a lot
in a small amount of time
as long as it's
stuck together.
I'm just trying to get it
- He's got those
delams everywhere.
It's separating at the tip.
- Yeah.
He's just trying to
hammer them out.
- I've hit the full
panic mode.
I realize that I will
have nothing
to turn in to the judges.
- If he doesn't put a knife in,
he's going home.
[screams]
[bleep]!
*
I realize
that I will have nothing
to turn in
to the judges.
I told myself that if I get
stuck with a problem,
then I need to abandon it,
no matter what time
I have left on the clock.
- Holy [bleep].
Neil just grabbed
one of the small canisters.
He's filling it
with ball bearings.
- No way.
- He's grabbing another billet
to start over with 35 minutes
left on the clock.
- I don't think it's possible.
- We've seen miracles happen.
- I'll die trying to make it.
*
- Kelly, in the quench.
She should have hard steel
all the way around.
- It's so very soft.
[bleep].
I'm assuming it's just
the mild steel jacket.
So I have to just go to town
with the angle grinder,
trying to find a hard piece
in there somewhere
so that I can do
a second heat treat.
*
- Nick just quenched.
[Neil screams]
Come on!
[Wil laughs]
- I do make this thing at home
where I take a 2-inch-by-2-inch
piece of steel
and draw it out
as an example to show.
So I know I can draw
a single can out pretty far.
- 2 inches wide
by a 1/4 inch thick.
You get 18 inches out
if you lose zero.
Won't all these guys
be mad if he gets
enough blade
out of one canister?
*
Neil is a freaking magic man.
Look at that.
- He can leave can
on the outside.
All he needs to do is expose
that center steel
so he has hardened steel
on the edge of that knife.
- Theo...letting his blade
cool down quite a bit.
- Yeah.
- I need to normalize
this blade.
It's undergone a lot
of transformation.
But it's big and thick
and heavy,
so I can see that it's gonna be
down to the last minute.
If this comes out
of the quench really warped,
I'm gonna have
seconds to fix it.
So fingers crossed.
*
- Theo and Kelly are in.
Come on, here we go.
- Whoo!
- All right.
- Neil's in.
- All the blades are in.
- [bleep]!
[screams]
*
- Five, four, three,
two, one!
Bladesmiths, shut
down your machines!
Drop your tools, because
this champion's round is over!
- This is the ugliest thing
I have ever made in my life.
[chuckling]
But I put it all out there--
everything I had.
And that, to me, is what
I see as a champion.
*
- Bladesmiths, that was an
amazing round of competition.
Now it's time for the judges
to take a closer look
at your work.
Theo, you're up first.
*
- The handle seems small
in terms of its balance
for the blade.
The way it is right now,
it's very forward-heavy.
So hopefully you'll be able
to flare that out.
Have an anchor here
to protect it
from going away
from your hand.
- Kelly, you're next.
Please present your blade
to the judges.
*
- Well, Kelly, it's a beast.
- [chuckles]
- I like
the overall shape of it.
The welds all seem
very tight.
It's got a little bit of a warp,
but that's well within grinder
range for something this thick.
*
- Nick, you're up.
Please present your blade
to the judges.
*
- Well, Nick,
I see some issues
with the cans that you
welded together.
There's a lot
of delamination,
and the big issue, you could put
a playing card in there.
It's quite a massive crack.
- I'm very worried that
a lot of that Wite-Out
was still in those cans
back in here.
That seam is running
from there to there,
up the middle of this.
And if this progresses
and as you remove this,
my biggest concern is that
you're gonna open up
areas in this knife
that are virtually hollow.
- Neil, you're up.
*
- Well, Neil, if I were
these three guys,
I'd be mad as hell at you,
because you just
showed them they wasted
two and a half hours
and multiple canisters
to do what they could have done
with one can and 32 minutes.
Needless to say,
it's a little rough.
But the welds are tight,
and, my God, it's a knife.
Well done.
- Thank you.
- Bladesmiths, the judges have
completed their deliberation.
It's time for one of you
bladesmiths to leave the Forge.
*
Nick, your blade
did not make the cut.
- Nick, first off,
your energy in this forge
is infectious.
But in the end,
it came down to
the deep void that runs
down the center of that blade.
And that's why we've
got to let you go.
I don't think there's
any way we can fix that.
- Ow.
- Nick, please surrender
your blade.
*
- I completely agree
with the judges.
It looks like [bleep].
Beep that part.
It's very frustrating
having made something
that I'm not really proud of.
But I'm still a champion,
so I'm doing all right.
[imitates crying]
No, not really.
*
- Bladesmiths, congratulations.
You've made it
to the second round.
But your work is far from over
in this tournament of champions.
Of course, in this
round of competition,
you will be placing
handles on your blades
to turn them into
fully functional weapons.
You will have three hours
in this round.
Your time starts now.
*
- And away we go.
- Who do you think
has the most work to do?
- I would say it's Kelly.
The amount of steel she has
on her blade
has to be ground out.
- Up on your soapbox, huh?
- I'm up on my box.
So my plan for round two
is to camp out at the grinder
for quite some time.
I've got a big old knife.
*
My biggest concern is there's
not enough sanding belts
in the state of New York
for three of us
to finish our knives.
I'm keeping an eyeball on Theo
to make sure he's not robbing
all the good belts.
I want my half of the belts,
damn it. [chuckles]
- Very first thing
I'm gonna have to do
is address the judges' concern
that the handle seemed
a little bit small.
There we go.
- Theo, just to extend that
handle a little bit,
and he's actually welded a
section
to make his tang longer.
- I want to make sure I made
a handle large enough
for the judges.
Can I get some hands on this?
- No.
- Your hands are
bigger than mine.
- Go over there.
What are you doing over here?
Get out of here.
We all looked at him
like he was on drugs.
- I almost grabbed it.
- Whatever.
I have to just imagine that
my hand was sausage fingers.
*
- So the one genius thing
I think that Neil has done
is he's set us up with the
expectation of a rustic blade.
[laughter]
- My design is like a two-piece
handle construction
or four
or I don't know.
Two per side,
I guess.
[laughs]
After winning "Forged in Fire,"
I noticed
that I sell a lot of knives
to first-time knife buyers.
Typically, the majority
of them are girls.
People better watch out.
There's a lot of armed girls
out there now.
[laughs]
- We're about an hour
and 45 minutes into this,
and Kelly hasn't stepped
away from the grinder yet.
- Just need to get
a handle on,
and then I can go back
to the grinder
and work on my blade
some more.
What do we got?
- You can slap a handle on
pretty quickly if you have to.
I just hate to see people
putting a handle on
as an afterthought.
- I used to get popsicles
that looked just like this
when I was a kid.
My biggest concern
about coming back
is failing miserably
and being sent home
on a Greyhound
'cause I don't even deserve,
like, an airplane ticket.
- There are just 60
tiny little minutes
left on the clock!
- I liked the blue theme
of the original chopper I made,
and I decided to keep with it.
Bluing the spine actually
helps the blade absorb shock,
so it's nice and soft
in the spine
and shock absorbing
for that ice chop.
- He's softening the spine
to make sure that if anything
were to happen,
it doesn't snap in two.
- I went with a synthetic
material that I think is paper
and other [bleep] I'm not
exactly sure about,
but it matched the theme,
so I just kind of went with it.
I think I was invited back
because of the terrible jokes
that I told.
I bought a dog
from a blacksmith.
I know the dog
was from a blacksmith,
because as soon
as I got him home,
he made a bolt
for the door.
[imitates rim shot]
*
- I finish off my handle,
so I decide to go straight
to the acid etch, because
why are you gonna do
canister Damascus
and not acid-etch it?
That's the whole point.
I want to see what's in there.
- Ten minutes!
- I'm running out of time.
So I decide I need to leave
my handle fairly rough
and try and put
an edge on it.
Once I start getting down
to where it's tapering
and looking more like an edge,
I see, like, a little crack
showing up.
Like, right on
the edge of the blade.
I'm a little nervous,
but I don't have time
to do anything about it.
Bad Kelly.
- Five, four, three,
two, one!
Bladesmiths, drop your tools.
This round is over.
*
- I'm happy
I finished my blade.
But I'm concerned about
delamination on the edge.
I'm afraid that can be
a catastrophic failure
that sends me home.
- Champions, I'm gonna
take your blades.
I'm gonna chop into these
ice blocks six times each.
Never underestimate
ice's strength.
It has sunk ships,
and it's broken blades.
Neil, you're up first.
- Bust them.
[laughs]
*
I'm nervous.
If my blade chips
into a million pieces
or breaks,
then I'm done.
*
- Wow.
- Okay, Neil.
Your blade held up really well.
It destroyed some ice.
The handle is a little bit
wider than I'd prefer,
but in all, it's a nice
heavy chopper
for such a small blade
and for something made
out of one canister.
Nice job.
- Thank you.
- Theo, you're up next.
Are you ready?
- Yeah... [mutters]
Let's do it.
*
I'm a bit worried.
But this test is
a very good icebreaker.
[imitates rim shot]
*
Whoo!
- Holy crap.
- [laughs]
He killed it.
*
Well, Theo,
as you can see,
an extremely impressive
job on the ice.
There is a little bit of
deflection of the edge up here.
But overall, it held up
really well.
- Thank you.
- Kelly, you're up next.
You ready?
- Oh, yeah.
- All right. Let's do it.
*
- Right now I'm
so, so, so nervous.
I'm worried about those cracks
right on the edge.
My blade could
very well blow apart.
*
[chuckles]
- Well, Kelly,
we've got some chips.
I think it's right at the
forge weld near the edge here.
But the rest of the blade
held up nicely.
Nice job. Thank you.
- Thanks.
- All right, champions,
this is the sharpness test.
Now, to test the sharpness
of the edge of your blade,
I'll be cutting through
these five water bottles.
If your knife's sharp,
we should leave the bottom
of those bottles
sitting on the deck.
Neil, you ready?
- [laughs]
Mine will get
thrown the farthest.
[laughter]
*
- Okay, Neil.
That is a very stout edge.
It's sharp.
We cut through three bottles,
nicked the fourth,
shoved one out of the way.
Well done.
- Thank you.
- Theo, you're up.
Are you ready?
- Let's do it.
- Okay.
*
- All right,
you can see there are
five water bottle bases
still on the table.
They tipped over.
I'm not worried about that.
All five cut.
Good job.
- Thank you.
- Kelly, you ready?
- I'm ready.
- All right.
*
That's a big knife.
[laughter]
We took four of these
bottles in half,
but that thick profile pushed
everything out of the way.
I don't even think I nicked
the last bottle.
But it did the job.
Nicely done.
- Thanks.
- Bladesmiths, you've all done
an excellent job
in this competition.
However, only two can
move on to the finale.
So it's time for one of you
to leave the Forge.
*
Kelly, your blade
did not make the cut.
- Kelly, I really enjoy
watching you work.
Nobody swings hammers
like farriers.
But in the end,
those chips that popped off
of your blade
in the ice chop,
well, that's something
we can't overlook,
and that's the reason
we're sending you home.
- I understand.
- Kelly, you're a
fantastic competitor,
and I know the community
respects the hell out of you.
But today I have to ask you
to surrender your weapon
and please leave the Forge.
*
- In every competition
there's a winner,
and there's people
that don't win.
It's the Champions
of Champions,
so to be in the middle
of that was pretty cool.
When I get home,
I'm gonna make
so many cans of Damascus.
I'm gonna just start
stacking them together.
I think I might just make
a Rubik's Cube
out of canister Damascus.
I think that would be amazing.
*
- Neil, Theo,
congratulations.
You've made it into the finale
for this competition.
There's only one thing
you have left to do.
And that is to go back home
and re-create an iconic weapon
from history...
*
The Tai Chi sword.
Emerging from China
over 2,500 years ago,
the Tai Chi sword is known
as "The Gentleman of Weapons,"
due to its refinement
and sophistication.
Symbolizing
power and authority,
the weapon is one of
the most common ancient weapons
still in practice,
with millions of students
studying it worldwide.
Fast and light,
its straight double-edged blade
was used for quick stabs
and lethal cuts,
while the sword's fairly blunt
lower section
was built
to block and deflect attacks.
Its reputation is also
preserved in popular culture
through its role as the coveted
Green Destiny sword
in the film "Crouching Tiger,
Hidden Dragon."
Your blade
must be double-edged,
have a winged guard,
and pommel.
- Last time I was on the show,
I made a naginata.
In comparison, the Tai Chi
sword has a lot more blade.
It's gonna be
a lot of work.
- You will have five days
at your home forge
to accomplish this.
At the end of five days,
you will return
and present your work to
our panel of expert judges.
And only after they've
brutally tested them
will they declare one of you
the "Forged in Fire"
Champion of Champions
and give you that cash.
- I'm concerned because the
Tai Chi sword is really light.
I probably have regular knives
that are heavier
than that whole sword.
So that's a challenge for me.
- Good luck, bladesmiths.
We'll see you in five days.
- Best of luck, man.
*
- It's a definite honor to be
in the position that I'm at.
I got to build
a Tai Chi sword.
I think they're confused.
I'm not Chinese.
[laughs]
It's gonna be a hard job.
This is the first time I've
ever made something this long.
Holy [bleep].
But I'm never gonna quit.
*
It's heavy.
I guarantee you mine's gonna be
heavier than Theo's.
I don't like
skinny little things.
I like things with some stout.
[laughs]
This thing's monster.
*
- Here we are at my forge.
The very first thing
I'm gonna do
is start forge-welding
things together.
Please go right.
The biggest obstacle
is the raw amount of forging
I have to do,
then getting the guard to
forge-weld to the blade itself,
and then being able to forge
the pommel on it as well.
If the welds don't hold,
everything
will be coming apart.
How important are
guards on swords?
They can be integral.
[imitates rim shot]
- I really need to make
a guard for this sword.
It needs a guard
that's winged up.
So what better than a bowl?
There's a lot of pressure
to build something
Champion of Champion-worthy.
But I don't want to lose
who I am,
which is taking anything
that anybody can get
and create something
that can compete.
This is, like, Chinese,
so they can eat soup out of it
at the same time.
[laughing]
- Today's the quench.
Big moment of truth.
Should have practiced
this motion with this new setup.
If things go wrong right now,
I got to start again.
So, no pressure.
*
Perfectly straight.
Things went amazingly well.
But now I got to work
on the handle material.
It's definitely gonna be
the most challenging part
of this weapon.
Oh, come on, Theo.
[bleep] Christ.
If I don't get this to sit well
inside of the little valley
that I've created here,
it's gonna look horrible.
*
- Today is important.
The blade has to be
heated evenly.
Trying to get
the sword lighter
has been
kind of difficult.
And being that this is
the longest thing
I've ever heat-treated,
I'm not really set up for it.
*
I can feel it
want to bend
because of the weight
of the tip.
So I am scared.
If something goes wrong,
I won't have time to fix it.
*
- I can kind of feel it
want to bend
because of the weight
of the tip.
So I am a little bit scared.
*
My blade is straight.
I don't have to re-quench it.
I'm stoked.
- Today's all about polishing
and finishing.
I'm happy with the blade.
If I win, the money
would most likely go
to starting a new life
with my wife.
I had to put that in there.
I'd get in trouble if I didn't.
Oh, God,
we're still recording.
I'm sorry, Daisy.
*
- Theo, Neil,
welcome back to the Forge.
Theo, tell us
about your blade.
- It went very well.
I did an integral guard
and pommel
by forge-welding on
both of them.
The blade's handle is
relatively simple construction
so that it can be
beaten the [bleep] out of.
- You sound monotone-ly
excited about that.
Neil, how'd it go
for you, man?
- Same recipe as
the last time I was here.
Go to the junkyard,
get some stuff,
because I didn't expect
to make it this far.
[laughing]
- All right.
Well, gentlemen,
up first is the strength test.
Ben?
- Champions, I'm gonna be
hitting this bamboo five times.
Remember, it's not what
your sword does to the bamboo,
but what the bamboo
does to your sword.
Theo, you're up first.
How are you feeling?
- A little nervous.
Let's go for it.
*
- Well Theo, this is
a brute of a sword.
The edge held up perfectly.
I don't see any problems.
Still straight as an arrow.
The handle is a little bit
difficult to really control.
I would have liked a little bit
more meat on in,
but very well done.
- Thank you.
- Neil, you're up next.
- Boy, that's a tough test.
[laughs]
That bamboo setup--
it's literally
just blunt-force trauma.
I don't think a lot of blades
can survive
that kind
of jarring and punishment.
*
- Well, Neil,
the sword is heavy.
I wouldn't want to be
running around with it.
There's a little bit of damage
that the bamboo gave back
to your sword,
but it's still straight.
Very well done. Nice job.
- Thank you.
- Next up is the sharpness test.
For that, Dave.
- All right, gentlemen,
I'm gonna be chopping
through these tatami mats,
using both edges
of your sword.
Let's see if your blades
still have an edge.
Theo, you're up first.
You ready for it?
- Uh, yeah.
Sure.
*
I'm very nervous
at this point.
This is the "make it
or break it" moment.
I have to perform well
on this test.
*
- All right, Theo.
Definitely a sharp blade.
You can see the nice clean slice
and then burying
into the second.
I like the design.
It's definitely a solid piece.
And that's one of
the nice things about it.
I don't feel like
it's gonna go anywhere.
Well done.
- Thank you.
- All right, Neil.
You ready?
- Yep.
[laughs]
*
- So the biggest thing
is all that weight.
About twice what it needs to be,
as far as weight goes.
It's difficult to swing.
And then the edge of this blade,
it's got a very stout profile,
almost like an axe.
Just kept it from cutting
all the way through.
- Theo, Neil,
we took five champions.
We whittled it down to two.
But there can only be
one "Forged in Fire"
Champion of Champions.
That champion is...
*
Theo.
Congratulations.
Neil, unfortunately, your weapon
did not make the cut.
- Neil, you came up
and showed us
that you had the heart
to make it to the finals
and against
four other champions.
But your sword took some damage
through the strength test.
But more than that,
it's heavy.
A Tai Chi sword is known to be
strong, sharp, and light.
For those reasons,
we have to let you go.
- Neil, please surrender
your weapon.
- I 100% agree
with the judges.
Theo earned it.
But I don't look at this
as a failure in any means,
because I gave it my all.
I can walk away,
look everybody in the eye,
and have everyone's respect.
And that's worth more to me
than any title
or any amount of money.
*
- Theo, congratulations.
You are the new "Forged in Fire"
Champion of Champions
and will be receiving
a check for $10,000.
How do you feel right now?
- Whew.
Boy, the butterflies
and the nerves are still going,
but thank you, guys.
- Please present your weapon
to the judges.
I [bleep] won!
[grunts, laughs]
My ego was pretty big
beforehand,
and I think this is only going
to inflate it.
Not a good thing,
not a bad thing...
I think.
*